readme.md, before:

# Climate API Readme

- [Climate API Readme](#climate-api-readme)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
    - [Python module installation with pip](#python-module-installation-with-pip)
    - [Python module installation with conda](#python-module-installation-with-conda)
  - [Installation & Usage](#installation--usage)
    - [With provided database](#with-provided-database)
    - [Without provided database](#without-provided-database)
    - [With VSCode and Edge](#with-vscode-and-edge)
    - [Start flask app](#start-flask-app)
    - [Install Browser driver](#install-browser-driver)
    - [Configure database connection string](#configure-database-connection-string)
  - [Extensions](#extensions)
    - [Add new parameters](#add-new-parameters)
    - [New login information](#new-login-information)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Scraping](#scraping)
      - [webscraping.py](#webscrapingpy)
    - [API](#api)
      - [app.py & API folder](#apppy--api-folder)
        - [app.py](#apppy)
        - [API folder](#api-folder)
          - [adminAPI.py](#adminapipy)
          - [dbAPI.py](#dbapipy)
          - [scrapeAPI.py](#scrapeapipy)
          - [streamAPI.py](#streamapipy)
      - [db.py](#dbpy)
      - [download.py](#downloadpy)
      - [idawebConfig.xml](#idawebconfigxml)
      - [idawebConfigInitial.xml](#idawebconfiginitialxml)
      - [messageAnnouncer.py](#messageannouncerpy)
      - [responseDict.py](#responsedictpy)
      - [abstractDriver.py](#abstractdriverpy)
    - [Dashboard](#dashboard)
      - [dashboard.py](#dashboardpy)
    - [Story](#story)
      - [story.py](#storypy)
    - [Tests](#tests)
      - [webscraping_test.py](#webscraping_testpy)
      - [db_test.py TODO Check name when branch is merged](#db_testpy-todo-check-name-when-branch-is-merged)
    - [Database implementation](#database-implementation)
      - [Stage](#stage)
      - [Core](#core)
      - [ERD](#erd)

## Requirements

The following programs and modules are required to run the climate API

- [ ] Python 3.7
- [ ] Postgres
- [ ] Modules

| modules                   | version |
|---------------------------|---------|
| dash_bootstrap_components | 0.12.2  |
| SQLAlchemy_Utils          | 0.36.8  |
| Flask                     | 1.1.2   |
| dash                      | 1.19.0  |
| msedge_selenium_tools     | 3.141.3 |
| statsmodels               | 0.12.0  |
| urllib3                   | 1.25.11 |
| plotly                    | 4.14.3  |
| dash_core_components      | 1.3.1   |
| numpy                     | 1.19.2  |
| selenium                  | 3.141.0 |
| SQLAlchemy                | 1.3.20  |
| requests                  | 2.24.0  |
| dash_html_components      | 1.0.1   |
| pytest                    | 0.0.0   |
| lxml                      | 4.6.1   |
| pandas                    | 1.1.3   |
| python_dateutil           | 2.8.1   |
| scikit_learn              | 0.24.2  |

### Python module installation with pip

If desired, install pipenv with following code:

~~~ cmd
pip install --user pipenv
~~~

Installing dependencies with pipenv is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
pipenv install requests
~~~

[Pipenv guide](https://docs.python-guide.org/dev/virtualenvs/)

Installing dependencies with pip is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
pip install numpy
~~~

In case of issues while starting climate API or conflicting versions run:

~~~ cmd
pip freeze | %{$_.split('==')[0]} | %{pip install --upgrade $_}
~~~

### Python module installation with conda

If desired, activate environment before installing dependencies with following code:

~~~ cmd
conda create --no-default-packages -n myenv python
conda activate ./envs
~~~

[Anaconda environment documentation](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#:~:text=%20Managing%20environments%20%C2%B6%20%201%20Creating%20an,conda%20environment%20lives%20by%20providing%20a...%20More%20)

Installing dependencies with conda is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
conda install numpy
~~~

In case of issues while starting climate API or conflicting versions run:

~~~ cmd
conda upgrade --all
~~~

## Installation & Usage

### With provided database

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for the climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Start flask app ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
5. Open the web browser
6. Navigate to [localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000)
7. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
8. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
9. Press action button to connect to database
10. Open pgAdmin or equivalent
11. Import database
12. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
13. Start server ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
14. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
15. Use app

---

### Without provided database

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Start flask app ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
5. Open the web browser
6. Navigate to [localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000)
7. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
8. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
9. Press action button to connect to database
10. Press action button to create database tables
11. Run ETL load
12. Run Core load
13. Stop server
14. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
15. Start server ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
16. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
17. Use app

---

### With VSCode and Edge

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Open VSCode
5. Launch debug config FE + Flask
6. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
7. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
8. Press action button to connect to database
9. Press action button to create database tables
10. Run ETL load
11. Run Core load
12. Stop server
13. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
14. Launch debug config FE + Flask
15. Use app

---

### Start flask app

Command Prompt

~~~ cmd
> set FLASK_APP=app.py
> set FLASK_ENV=production
> flask run
~~~

PowerShell

~~~ powershell
> $env:FLASK_APP = "app.py"
> $env:FLASK_ENV = "production"
> flask run
~~~

Linux (untested)

~~~ bash
export FLASK_APP=app.py
export FLASK_ENV=production
flask run
~~~

**Important**, start anaconda / pip environment before starting the flask app

### Install Browser driver

In order to get new data selenium requires a browser driver to scrape websites

> Browser version is checked automatically

Installation as follows:

Edge

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Press `Driver name`
3. Press `Download driver`

Chrome

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin/driver/Chrome?headless=false](http://localhost:5000/admin/driver/Chrome?headless=false)

### Configure database connection string

![Postgres config page](/static/postgresConfigString.png)

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Choose database type in drop down (Only supports Postgres)
3. Enter Database username
4. Enter database password (Not encrypted!)
5. Enter database location (Only supports localhost)
6. Select port
7. Submit form

Postgres connection string is save in [config/config.json](config/config.json)

## Extensions

### Add new parameters

1. Open [idawebConfig.xml](idawebConfig.xml)
2. Add new parameter with name, group and granularity
3. Restart Server
4. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin/database](http://localhost:5000/admin/database)
5. Click on idaweb_t
6. Run increment load

---

### New login information

In the case of a blocked idaweb account

1. Open [webscraping.py](webscraping.py)
2. Change the login information at the start of the file

## How it works

### Scraping

---

#### [webscraping.py](webscraping.py)

[webscraping.py](webscraping.py) contains both meteoschweiz and idaweb scraping functions

### API

---

#### [app.py](app.py) & API folder

##### [app.py](app.py)

1. Instantiates the blueprint for all sub APIs in the API folder
2. Contains the main routes for the API

##### API folder

1. All blueprints for different parts of the API

###### [adminAPI.py](api/adminAPI.py)

1. Contains the main admin page routes

###### [dbAPI.py](api/dbAPI.py)

1. Contains database routes on the [admin page](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Contains all database interface routes

###### [scrapeAPI.py](api/scrapeAPI.py)

1. Contains all scraping routes

###### [streamAPI.py](api/streamAPI.py)

1. Handles all sse streams to the front end

#### [db.py](db.py)

[db.py](db.py) does the following things:

1. All interaction with database
   1. Database creation
   2. Table creation
   3. Selects
   4. Inserts
2. Creates announcer for the front end
3. Creates messages of database status and sends them over the sse to the front end

#### [download.py](download.py)

Helper file with functions for `POST` and `GET` requests

1. Contains helper functions for idaweb file download

#### [idawebConfig.xml](idawebConfig.xml)

1. Contains idaweb parameters to download and refresh

#### [idawebConfigInitial.xml](idawebConfigInitial.xml)

1. Used for development as temporary storage of configurations

#### [messageAnnouncer.py](messageAnnouncer.py)

[messageAnnouncer.py](messageAnnouncer.py) does the following things:

1. sse
2. queueing
3. formatting

#### [responseDict.py](responseDict.py)

[responseDict.py](responseDict.py) does the following things:

1. Response sending for the front end
2. Button disabling for the front end
3. Creating a progressbar for the front end
4. Starting materialized view refresh after data inserts

#### [abstractDriver.py](abstractDriver.py)

[abstractDriver.py](abstractDriver.py) handles all selenium driver interactions

1. Driver installation
2. Creating front end information about driver status

### [Dashboard](http//localhost:5000/dashboard)

---

#### [dashboard.py](dashboard.py)

[dashboard.py](dashboard.py) does the following things:

1. Creation of the dashboard its structure
2. Selection of the data displayed on the dashboard
3. Wrangling of the selected data
4. Handling of user interaction using callbacks

### [Story](http://localhost:5000)

---

#### [story.py](story.py)

[story.py](story.py) does the following things:

1. Creation of the story its structure
2. Selection of data displayed in the story
3. Wrangling of the selected data

### [Tests](http://localhost:5000/admin/tests)

---

#### [webscraping_test.py](webscraping.py)

Contains all unit tests of the webscraping

#### db_test.py TODO Check name when branch is merged

Contains all unit tests of the database

### Database implementation

---

TODO fix wording and structure

- Database is divided into two main schemas, Stage and Core
- All tables have corresponding materialized views for number of rows and last update
- Data is copied from left to right
  - Text files / Web into stage tables
  - Stage tables into Core tables

#### Stage

Stage schema contain all new data

- Can contain duplicate entries
- Has No primary keys
- Contains raw data

#### Core

- Cannot contain duplicate entries due to natural primary key violation
- Data is indexed for faster selects
- idaweb_t and meteoschweiz_t are merged into measurements_t table
- Columns get added for the description of the data source
- Data gets parsed into the format used in future analysis
- Core data never gets deleted, can be used to add new data

#### ERD

![databaseERD](/static/databaseERD.png)

Commit message:

Added more detailed scraping description

readme.md, after:

# Climate API Readme

- [Climate API Readme](#climate-api-readme)
  - [Requirements](#requirements)
    - [Python module installation with pip](#python-module-installation-with-pip)
    - [Python module installation with conda](#python-module-installation-with-conda)
  - [Installation & Usage](#installation--usage)
    - [With provided database](#with-provided-database)
    - [Without provided database](#without-provided-database)
    - [With VSCode and Edge](#with-vscode-and-edge)
    - [Start flask app](#start-flask-app)
    - [Install Browser driver](#install-browser-driver)
    - [Configure database connection string](#configure-database-connection-string)
  - [Extensions](#extensions)
    - [Add new parameters](#add-new-parameters)
    - [New login information](#new-login-information)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
    - [Scraping](#scraping)
      - [webscraping.py](#webscrapingpy)
    - [API](#api)
      - [app.py & API folder](#apppy--api-folder)
        - [app.py](#apppy)
        - [API folder](#api-folder)
          - [adminAPI.py](#adminapipy)
          - [dbAPI.py](#dbapipy)
          - [scrapeAPI.py](#scrapeapipy)
          - [streamAPI.py](#streamapipy)
      - [db.py](#dbpy)
      - [download.py](#downloadpy)
      - [idawebConfig.xml](#idawebconfigxml)
      - [idawebConfigInitial.xml](#idawebconfiginitialxml)
      - [messageAnnouncer.py](#messageannouncerpy)
      - [responseDict.py](#responsedictpy)
      - [abstractDriver.py](#abstractdriverpy)
    - [Dashboard](#dashboard)
      - [dashboard.py](#dashboardpy)
    - [Story](#story)
      - [story.py](#storypy)
    - [Tests](#tests)
      - [webscraping_test.py](#webscraping_testpy)
      - [db_test.py TODO Check name when branch is merged](#db_testpy-todo-check-name-when-branch-is-merged)
    - [Database implementation](#database-implementation)
      - [Stage](#stage)
      - [Core](#core)
      - [ERD](#erd)

## Requirements

The following programs and modules are required to run the climate API

- [ ] Python 3.7
- [ ] Postgres
- [ ] Modules

| modules                   | version |
|---------------------------|---------|
| dash_bootstrap_components | 0.12.2  |
| SQLAlchemy_Utils          | 0.36.8  |
| Flask                     | 1.1.2   |
| dash                      | 1.19.0  |
| msedge_selenium_tools     | 3.141.3 |
| statsmodels               | 0.12.0  |
| urllib3                   | 1.25.11 |
| plotly                    | 4.14.3  |
| dash_core_components      | 1.3.1   |
| numpy                     | 1.19.2  |
| selenium                  | 3.141.0 |
| SQLAlchemy                | 1.3.20  |
| requests                  | 2.24.0  |
| dash_html_components      | 1.0.1   |
| pytest                    | 0.0.0   |
| lxml                      | 4.6.1   |
| pandas                    | 1.1.3   |
| python_dateutil           | 2.8.1   |
| scikit_learn              | 0.24.2  |

### Python module installation with pip

If desired, install pipenv with following code:

~~~ cmd
pip install --user pipenv
~~~

Installing dependencies with pipenv is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
pipenv install requests
~~~

[Pipenv guide](https://docs.python-guide.org/dev/virtualenvs/)

Installing dependencies with pip is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
pip install numpy
~~~

In case of issues while starting climate API or conflicting versions run:

~~~ cmd
pip freeze | %{$_.split('==')[0]} | %{pip install --upgrade $_}
~~~

### Python module installation with conda

If desired, activate environment before installing dependencies with following code:

~~~ cmd
conda create --no-default-packages -n myenv python
conda activate ./envs
~~~

[Anaconda environment documentation](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#:~:text=%20Managing%20environments%20%C2%B6%20%201%20Creating%20an,conda%20environment%20lives%20by%20providing%20a...%20More%20)

Installing dependencies with conda is done as follows:

~~~ cmd
conda install numpy
~~~

In case of issues while starting climate API or conflicting versions run:

~~~ cmd
conda upgrade --all
~~~

## Installation & Usage

### With provided database

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for the climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Start flask app ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
5. Open the web browser
6. Navigate to [localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000)
7. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
8. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
9. Press action button to connect to database
10. Open pgAdmin or equivalent
11. Import database
12. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
13. Start server ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
14. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
15. Use app

---

### Without provided database

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Start flask app ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
5. Open the web browser
6. Navigate to [localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000)
7. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
8. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
9. Press action button to connect to database
10. Press action button to create database tables
11. Run ETL load
12. Run Core load
13. Stop server
14. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
15. Start server ([Instruction](#start-flask-app))
16. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
17. Use app

---

### With VSCode and Edge

1. Install Python
2. Install all required modules for climate API ([Requirements](#requirements))
3. Install Postgres
4. Open VSCode
5. Launch debug config FE + Flask
6. Configure database connection string ([Instruction](#configure-database-connection-string))
7. Navigate to database tab of administration overview
8. Press action button to connect to database
9. Press action button to create database tables
10. Run ETL load
11. Run Core load
12. Stop server
13. Uncomment dashboard creation line in [app.py](app.py)
14. Launch debug config FE + Flask
15. Use app

---

### Start flask app

Command Prompt

~~~ cmd
> set FLASK_APP=app.py
> set FLASK_ENV=production
> flask run
~~~

PowerShell

~~~ powershell
> $env:FLASK_APP = "app.py"
> $env:FLASK_ENV = "production"
> flask run
~~~

Linux (untested)

~~~ bash
export FLASK_APP=app.py
export FLASK_ENV=production
flask run
~~~

**Important**, start anaconda / pip environment before starting the flask app

### Install Browser driver

In order to get new data selenium requires a browser driver to scrape websites

> Browser version is checked automatically

Installation as follows:

Edge

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Press `Driver name`
3. Press `Download driver`

Chrome

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin/driver/Chrome?headless=false](http://localhost:5000/admin/driver/Chrome?headless=false)

### Configure database connection string

![Postgres config page](/static/postgresConfigString.png)

1. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Choose database type in drop down (Only supports Postgres)
3. Enter Database username
4. Enter database password (Not encrypted!)
5. Enter database location (Only supports localhost)
6. Select port
7. Submit form

Postgres connection string is save in [config/config.json](config/config.json)

## Extensions

### Add new parameters

1. Open [idawebConfig.xml](idawebConfig.xml)
2. Add new parameter with name, group and granularity
3. Restart Server
4. Navigate to [localhost:5000/admin/database](http://localhost:5000/admin/database)
5. Click on idaweb_t
6. Run increment load

---

### New login information

In the case of a blocked idaweb account

1. Open [webscraping.py](webscraping.py)
2. Change the login information at the start of the file

## How it works

### Scraping

---

#### [webscraping.py](webscraping.py)

[webscraping.py](webscraping.py) contains both meteoschweiz and idaweb scraping functions

Both scraping methods utilize selenium to login and navigate webpages.
Selenium is currently configured with displayed browser in order to check activity.
Navigation and click events on page are done with either xpath or javascript paths.

Downloading of data on idaweb are done with the Python request module in headless mode.
Sessions are passed as arguments for each requests.

### API

---

#### [app.py](app.py) & API folder

##### [app.py](app.py)

1. Instantiates the blueprint for all sub APIs in the API folder
2. Contains the main routes for the API

##### API folder

1. All blueprints for different parts of the API

###### [adminAPI.py](api/adminAPI.py)

1. Contains the main admin page routes

###### [dbAPI.py](api/dbAPI.py)

1. Contains database routes on the [admin page](http://localhost:5000/admin)
2. Contains all database interface routes

###### [scrapeAPI.py](api/scrapeAPI.py)

1. Contains all scraping routes

###### [streamAPI.py](api/streamAPI.py)

1. Handles all sse streams to the front end

#### [db.py](db.py)

[db.py](db.py) does the following things:

1. All interaction with database
   1. Database creation
   2. Table creation
   3. Selects
   4. Inserts
2. Creates announcer for the front end
3. Creates messages of database status and sends them over the sse to the front end

#### [download.py](download.py)

Helper file with functions for `POST` and `GET` requests

1. Contains helper functions for idaweb file download

#### [idawebConfig.xml](idawebConfig.xml)

1. Contains idaweb parameters to download and refresh

#### [idawebConfigInitial.xml](idawebConfigInitial.xml)

1. Used for development as temporary storage of configurations

#### [messageAnnouncer.py](messageAnnouncer.py)

[messageAnnouncer.py](messageAnnouncer.py) does the following things:

1. sse
2. queueing
3. formatting

#### [responseDict.py](responseDict.py)

[responseDict.py](responseDict.py) does the following things:

1. Response sending for the front end
2. Button disabling for the front end
3. Creating a progressbar for the front end
4. Starting materialized view refresh after data inserts

#### [abstractDriver.py](abstractDriver.py)

[abstractDriver.py](abstractDriver.py) handles all selenium driver interactions

1. Driver installation
2. Creating front end information about driver status

### [Dashboard](http//localhost:5000/dashboard)

---

#### [dashboard.py](dashboard.py)

[dashboard.py](dashboard.py) does the following things:

1. Creation of the dashboard its structure
2. Selection of the data displayed on the dashboard
3. Wrangling of the selected data
4. Handling of user interaction using callbacks

### [Story](http://localhost:5000)

---

#### [story.py](story.py)

[story.py](story.py) does the following things:

1. Creation of the story its structure
2. Selection of data displayed in the story
3. Wrangling of the selected data

### [Tests](http://localhost:5000/admin/tests)

---

#### [webscraping_test.py](webscraping.py)

Contains all unit tests of the webscraping

#### db_test.py TODO Check name when branch is merged

Contains all unit tests of the database

### Database implementation

---

TODO fix wording and structure

- Database is divided into two main schemas, Stage and Core
- All tables have corresponding materialized views for number of rows and last update
- Data is copied from left to right
  - Text files / Web into stage tables
  - Stage tables into Core tables

#### Stage

Stage schema contain all new data

- Can contain duplicate entries
- Has No primary keys
- Contains raw data

#### Core

- Cannot contain duplicate entries due to natural primary key violation
- Data is indexed for faster selects
- idaweb_t and meteoschweiz_t are merged into measurements_t table
- Columns get added for the description of the data source
- Data gets parsed into the format used in future analysis
- Core data never gets deleted, can be used to add new data

#### ERD

![databaseERD](/static/databaseERD.png)
